Hip and knee osteoarthritis is a leading cause of disability and source of societal cost in older adults. Global prevalence of osteoarthritis is increasing and the burden of the disease will rise. The medical cost of osteoarthritis in various high-income countries has been estimated to account for between 1% and 2.5% of the gross domestic product of these countries, with hip and knee joint replacements representing the major proportion of these health-care costs. Joint replacement surgery is a clinically relevant and cost-effective treatment for end-stage osteoarthritis. The characteristics of end-stage osteoarthritis include joint pain, which disrupts normal sleep patterns and causes a severe reduction in capable walking distance and marked restriction of daily activities. Hence, the aim of knee and hip replacements is to alleviate pain and disability in daily functioning.

However, up to 25% of patients presenting for total joint replacement continue to complain of pain and disability 1 year after well performed surgery. With data available on thousands of patients, the question arises to what extent it is possible to predict treatment success. This could be useful in supporting doctors in deciding whether knee replacement is indicated, and could help give patients a more personalised assessment of what to expect of treatment.

Result
By the end of this course, you should be able to understand and reproduce the analysis in this paper by Huber et al. (2019) ↗ where PROMs following hip and knee replacement surgery are predicted using supervised learning.